# 01_fetch_greeks  

Fetch 2026-05-06 to 2026-05-19 SPY 0dte options data from Theta Data and save in data/raw/greeks/SPY.  

I choosed parquet for output file type to preserve data type. Each parquet file corresponds to one day of 0dte options. 


# 02_process_raw_greeks

Read previously saved SPY data from data/raw/greeks/SPY, filter out some meaningless data through the filter (implied_vol > 0, iv_error < 1.0, delta.abs().between(0.01, 0.99), bid > 0).  

Time matters to 0dte research, so I checked the timestamp handling in the data. All timestamp are in America/New_York time.  

For 0DTE SPY options, the closing price used for settlement is the SPY official last price at 4:00PM ET. Data is already in ET, so no additional timezone / daylight saving handling is needed.  

Some sanity check visualization:  

- ATM Call / Put ask price vs time to maturity
- underlying price by day
- IV smile at noon  

End-of-day price returned by ThetaData is at 17:15 which is not ideal becasue 0DTE closes at 16:00, so the underlying price at 16:00 is used as the closing (settlement) price. Similarly, the underlying price at 9:30 is used as opening price. These are processed in src/ and stored in data/processed. Closing and opening data are filtered because I don't want them in training. Then, closing and opening price are fetched from data/processed and added to dataframe as new column, and I verified data with same expirations have the same closing and opening price.  

Log-return `ln(closing price / current price)` is chosen to be the label, and log-return from open `ln(current price / opening price)` is calculated to be a potential feature. Since this is a 0DTE project, the closing / current / opening prices are fairly close, causing the absolute value of log-return to be very small. I tested the precision needed for log-return to ensure correctness of the closing price reconstruction, and the minimum precision needed for log-return is 5 decimal places. The calculated column in dataframe has 6 decimal places, which can make the closing price and the reconstruction match.  

Then, `src/process_raw_data.py` is created based on the trying and exploration of this notebook. To make sure the script in src matches the processing in this notebook logically, the processed data generated in the notebook and generated by the src are compared.  

NOTE: I plan to use `src/process_raw_data.py` to handle more data construction tasks, and new ideas may be tested in new notebooks. The two processed dataset match logically now, but later when `spy_processed.parquet` generated by `src/process_raw_data.py` can handle more data construction tasks, they may differ significantly. Same for later notebooks.  

# 03_process_raw_oi

Theta Data provides `option_history_open_interest` to get a snapshot of open interest data at 6:30 (3 hours before market open). I tested fetching OI on a specific date and checked the timestamp. So far I think this is the best I can get, so in this project I will use opening OI as feature and maybe feature engineering calculation later.  

I tried merging OI with greeks data, and fill all the NaN OI to 0 (because no OI data means 0 open interest). I start with merging one day data (2026-5-6), and then load and merge all data.  

OI fetching is added in `src/fetch_raw_data.py`, and is added as a new column in the greeks data in `src/process_raw_data.py`. Similar to `02_process_raw_greeks.ipynb`, I compared the data generated by this notebook and `src/process_raw_data.py`.  

# 04_calculate_gamma

The Theta Data standard plan only gives first order greeks, so I tried two ways to calculate gamma in this notebook.  
- Delta finite-difference approximation, gamma is the rate of change of delta w.r.t the underlying price.  
- Black-Scholes method calculated from underlying price, strike, implied volatility, time to maturity, and rist-free rate (negligible effect for 0DTE).  

The result shows that gamma calculated from the two methods generally agree, and gamma calculated from delta is noisier than calculated from Black-Scholes.  

Then, I used sample response in https://docs.thetadata.us/operations_python/option_history_trade_greeks_all.html as gamma calculation correctness check. I calculated the gamma using my Black-Scholes method with underlying price, strike price, time to maturity, implied volatility, and I compare the calculated gamma with the gamma shown in the website. I observed that when I use risk-free interest rate = 0.04 and use full calendar minutes per year instead of only using trading hours (this actually doesn't matter for my 0DTE project cause I don't need to care about night time from 16:00 to 9:30 next day in 0DTE options), my calculated gamma agrees with the sample response. The result is acceptable to me.  

Then similarly, d1 and gamma calculation is integrated in `src/process_raw_data.py`, and compared with the notebook.  

A simple visualization on 2026-5-6 data is created at the end of this notebook.  

# 05_exposure

Calculate dealer delta exposure DEX and net DEX under the assumption that dealer is short what customer is long, then the net DEX is visualized.  
2026-5-15 net dex data looks weirdly large in magnitude and noisy? Reason can be it's Friday and also monthly expiration date (SPY Monthly Expirations: Standard monthly options expire on the third Friday of every month), but I'm not sure. Logged in `questions`/.  

Similarly, calculate dealer gamma exposure GEX and net GEX, and visualize. Additional 0.01 multiplier is applied in GEX calculation due to the convention to use dollars per 1% move convention for gex calculation. The visualization of net GEX on 2026-5-15 doesn't look so weird.  

Same as previous notebooks, the exposures are integrated in `src/process_raw_data.py` and compared with the result in notebook.  

# 06_gamma_flip

Explored gamma flip, but I haven't decided how to formulate gamma flip yet. I may choose to formulate as strike where cumulative GEX crosses zero in each timestamp, or follow https://flashalpha.com/concepts/gamma-flip.  

# 07_iv

Add 25d call and put implied volatility. May consider using more delta but stick to +-0.25 for now. Then, I used the two values to calculate:  
- iv_skew_25d = iv_put_25d - iv_call_25d  
- iv_smile_curvature_25d = iv_put_25d + iv_call_25d - 2 * atm_iv  

Then I visualize these two calculated values vs time.  

# 08_theta_related

Add theta exposure `tex` in main dataframe. A sign flip is applied due to consistency (dex sign flip), then theta exposure is aggregated into `net_tex`. Similar to dex and gex, a normalized `net_tex_norm` is also added. Time to maturity `ttm_min` and `ttm_hours` are added to aggregate dataframe, and used to calculate `theta_decay`. Concept of theta decay: https://flashalpha.com/concepts/theta-decay  

Then new theta related features are visualized and compared to the one generated by src pipeline.  

# 09_pin_risk

Add the following pin risk related features:  
- `total_oi`: put + call OI at a (day, strike)  
- `max_oi_strike`: the strike price with max OI at a day  
- `oi_concentration_top3`: top 3 largest put + call OI / total OI in all strikes  
- `put_oi_fraction`: put OI / total OI at a (day, strike)  
- `distance_to_max_oi`: underlying price - max OI strike  

The following bid ask features are also added as a proxy for volume:  
- `bid_ask_mid` = (bid + ask) / 2  
- `bid_ask_spread` = ask - bid  
- `bid_ask_spread_norm` = bid ask spread / bid ask mid  